The plan was particularly effective and accepted
by the vast majority of the people in the city. And
not only that, whenever we had a bond issue and it
was known that the bond issue was in accordance
with the plan, it passed overwhelmingly. And
every time We approached a state or federal
agency. We showed them the plan, showed them what
the city was doing, and then outlined the part that
we thought that particular agency should be
responsible for. And invariably, we came away
with the acceptance of the agency of our request
and they granted the request and they followed the
plan. So the plan was followed very
conscientiously from the very beginning. The
only thing that was not done was the community
would not accept urban renewal. So the plan was
implemented
financed
with all the different agencies participating.
The Area Development Committee decided in 1949
and 1950
to proceed with the plan. It took three years to
complete the plan, and it was published in 1953.
The
plan was
virtually completed in the early 1960s. All of the
proposals had been accomplished
in the early 1960s. And so the Area Development
Committee, which remained active the full time,
decided that an update of the plan was needed, that
they needed new goals and objectives. So they went
back again to the Bartholomew Organization, and
asked them to update the plan. That
firm went to work and completed their plan and
submitted the final report in December 1967. The
second plan was technically very well done. The
goals and objectives were not as clear as in the
original plan. That
plan is still being used as a guide. And a number of
the things have been accomplished. one of which
was Corpus Christi Beach, or North Beach, the area
north of the ship channel
to Nueces and
Nueces Bay.
A request was made to the Corps of Engineers to
restore the beach. A great deal of
demolition of substandard dwellings, Corpus
Christi's own version of urban renewal without
federal assistance, was undertaken. And a great
many of the substandard housing that existed on
that beach was eliminated.
An act was secured. through Congress for the use of
the Beach Erosion Act to restore the sand beach in
this area that had eroded back to and even under
some of the buildings. It took 10 years of constant
effort to get this plan
completed and implemented through the Corps of
Engineers. The
restoration of the beach was accomplished in
about 1978 or 1979.
Another one of the objectives was the
construction of a dam, another water supply,
because the lake at Mathis had a limited capacity
and could not accommodate the expanding
industrial and domestic demand
for water.
Controversy arose as to the location of this dam.
The area development plan did recommend the site
that is now being completed for
the new dam at Cho Canyon.
The dam was
partially financed through the Bureau of
Reclamation.
The gates of this dam are going to be closed within
the next two months, and this lake will furnish a
water supply
well into the 2020s.
This is just finished now. That's just finished.
That's another accomplishment of the plan.
Bill, tell me, how did this project that I don't
know very much about, the goals for Corpus
Christi, how did that relate? The what? Goals for
Corpus Christi project. Goals for Corpus
Christi? How did that relate to the Area
Development Committee's work? Well, the Area
Development Committee did support the program
for the goals of Corpus Christi. A number of
committees were established, and the goals were
outlined and published. But unfortunately,
not very much has been done to follow up on it. It's a
nice book, and quite a few people have it, but very
little reference is ever made to it now. Not nearly
as effective as the one they had in Dallas.
The Area Development Committee did give support
to that. It was a more or less independent effort,
aside from the Area Development Committee. Yes.
They had their own They had their own employee that
did all the groundwork and assembled it and put it
together. Did it have any direct relationship to
the planning department?
No, no. And what about any direct relationship to
municipal government? Well, the mayor and the
council gave it encouragement. But I don't think
they did anything to really implement it. Nor the
county government, nor the school district.
Neither of them did anything very spectacular to
support it. This comprehensive plan did contain
several things that had a program for the
restoration of the central city.
It had a plan for an outer belt parkway system at the
Cayo del Oso, which is a creek on the perimeter of
the city. Nothing has been done with that except
there have been some committees that have been
working at it. But that's one of the goals and one of
the challenges that still remain for the city to
do.
Major changes in land use or the school system.
There was a plan for
the
Oso Bay to fill in sections of it and develop it.
This was unacceptable to the environmental
interests and has not been accomplished. There
was a feasibility study made to determine if a
offshore roadway could be built from downtown to
the south end of the city. This proved to be not
feasible.
Offshore road
was several thousand feet off the shore. It had
islands in connection with it that were could be
developed, both as residential and
recreational,
with connections into the shoreline. But the plan
was entirely too expensive and was
environmentally not acceptable.
In 1962,
thereabouts,
The federal government enacted the
federal government provided through the
U.S. Bureau of Public Roads
federal highway agency the opportunity to
prepare transportation plans for cities. Corpus
Christi was the first city in the United States to
apply for such a plan. The local district
engineer, Theo Foster, was entirely sympathetic
and agreed to help us go before the State Highway
Commission and seek approval of the preparation
of this plan.
Local people went there, the political leaders.
The Area Development Committee was interested
and helped, but did not take an active part.
We did get approval of the State Highway
Department. to proceed. The State Highway
Department had no planners on the staff, but
assigned some very good engineers that were
progressive and wanted to prepare a good plan. The
city and the county the navigation district, and
all agreed to assist
in the preparation of this plan by providing
technical assistance and staff.
As city planner, I was assigned to this committee,
and we had at least two members of our planning
staff that worked with the highway engineers that
were assigned to this. Do you remember their
names? One of them was
Earl Goetsch. How does he spell that?
G-O-E-T-S-C-H. He was a senior planner. And we had
the traffic engineer, Tom Stewart. We had public
works director. And
we had the right to call in as we needed them. of the
other city staff. The county engineer was on this,
Jesse Lawrence
participated, and we had regular meetings.
And we outlined what should be in the
transportation plan. And this was a pioneering
effort because it was, and we were considered the
guinea pig. And so we prepared our outline, which
contained such subjects as economic factors,
population, land use,
the inventory of transportation facilities,
studies on travel patterns, terminals and
transfer facilities, traffic engineering,
community controls, financial resources, and
methods of financing the
plan. And then there was a long range plan for the
major street system. proposed.
This plan was prepared and completed in 1964. And
as required by the federal legislation, the city
council was asked to adopt it. And they did. And
they The plan was very well followed,
particularly as to major streets
and thoroughfares.
But each year, in accordance with the federal
legislation, this plan was to be updated. So a
supplement was prepared each year on this plan.
Today, very little is being done with updating the
comprehensive city plan,
but through the transportation planning and the
various committees that were established at that
time, there has been some updating done. The city
manager during
the period from 1967 to 1980,
was
not interested in updating the comprehensive
plan. Why was that? Well,
he felt that Most of the updating could be done on an
administrative basis through the city manager's
office. Why did you feel that the city manager's
office was qualified to do the updating of
professional planning material? Well, the city
manager himself was a
graduate of a planning school. His degree was in
administration, but he had taken all of the
comprehensive planning at Cornell.
Well, what did the planning director have to say
about this arrangement?
The planning director informally
did proceed with some updating of the plans that
was me
but as separate reports as not as part of the
comprehensive plan
separate report on specific projects mostly
Marvin Townsend he was a very competent city
manager When did he—was he hired by the city? Yes,
he was hired by the city. When? Oh, he was started
out
in
the fifties, and he came up through the ranks to be
city manager. And then he left about— He left in
1981.
Who is the city manager now? The city manager now is
Mr. Martin, who was brought in here and formerly
city manager for Evanston, Illinois.
He's just getting started.
I know nothing about his interest in planning.
Today, Michael Gunning. who is the
transportation planner, does a great deal of
planning through that. For instance, all
subdivisions have to be approved by the
transportation planning section as it relates to
streets and highways. a generation of traffic and
land use.
I retired in 1973
from the city after 27 years of continuous
services director of planning. My successor was
Mr. Larry Winger. But there was this change in the
administrative
organization. There was a man that was called
Director of Planning and Urban Development. And
this man's
principal responsibilities were to implement
the federal
programs that were
being used by the city, housing programs and
welfare programs and programs of that kind. Mr.
Wenger, who was called the planner, continued to
do essentially what I had done for 27 years. There
has been a later revision of the administrative
plan, and Mr. Wenger is now the director of
planning again.
Very little is being done now. Do they still have a
director of urban development? Well, yes,
there's still one there, and that's at a higher
level. I see. That's in the manager's office?
That's in the manager's office, and Mr. Winger is
responsible to him.
Prior to that time, when I was director of
planning, I was directly responsible to the city
manager.
The Area Development Committee is still in
existence.
It is an autonomous committee of the Chamber of
Commerce. They select their own membership, and
they're appointed for long terms, six years, I
think.
They provide their own financing for anything
they do. The only thing that I know of recently that
they have done, they supported a review of the plan
for the Bayfront
by Sasaki Walker Organization.
Their man came down here. and made some study and
made a few suggestions which
were constructive.
OK. Bill,
I'm going to be interviewing several other people
in Corpus Christi, and I'd like to have any of your
ideas on any additional persons. But one person
that comes to mind is Ruth Gill, who was on the city
council for some time, and now she's with the COG.
And then Tom Brown, for his role as executive
director of the COG. And I understand that he's
going to be transferring over to the navigation
system. To where? Navigation
District. And I was thinking I should probably
interview Larry and Michael Gunning. Yeah. And
just get their views on things. Yeah, they're both
very good people to get their views on. Ruth Gill
was a very active person on the city council. She
was very sympathetic to the planning programs.
She eventually became active in the Council of
Governments, and she
has been chairman of a good many committees. One of
the committees she was chairman of was the Oso
Parkway Committee. And she was trying to find a
means to implement that plan. And as far as I know,
the committee is still active. I'm a member of that
committee. Well, I think the city is a much better
place because we had a city plan, a good
comprehensive plan that was
a plan of the people, the leadership, both
economic and political, were able to work
together, as well as a big segment of the citizens.
And as far as I have been able to learn, that they're
very happy with the results of the
plan.
We're in the office of Michael Gunning, senior
planner for the planning department of Corpus
Christi. This is the 29th of May, 1982. and Michael
is going to tell us a little bit about his personal,
professional history, how he came to be in Corpus
Christi, and then go on with some topics that have
already been discussed. Michael? Bob, I happen to
be one of those planners who walked into a, a
temporary job. It was at least temporary in my mind
when I first took the job under Jonathan
Cunningham with the Department of Planning with
the city of El Paso. I had graduated from Texas
Western College, now the University of Texas at El
Paso in 1966. I went ahead and completed one year of
law school at Texas Tech University and returned
home in the summer of 68 and married and shortly
thereafter my wife became pregnant with her first
child, not wanting to go back to law school,
completely broke. I ran into a few friends of mine
who had started work with the Department of
Planning, Jim Sorensen primarily, who told me
that I ought to come in and speak with Jonathan
Cunningham. And I did, and Jonathan hired me
basically on the spot to to work with some
projects, special research projects that he had
set up. And I started the Department of Planning as
a planning technician for $425 a month. And that
was back in September of 1968. I stayed with the
city of El Paso until March of 1973. And during my
years with El Paso, working with John Cunningham
and under his senior planners and assistant
director, Bill Adams, and at one time Nestor
Valencia. He had moved me through every aspect of
planning that one could imagine. My first job was
to update to a community facilities inventory for
the city of El Paso, which was very surprising
being a life, a long resident of El Paso and and
having to do the community facilities inventory
taught me that I really didn't know as much about
the city as I originally thought. And the second
project John put me on was to coordinate the
updating of all the land uses in El Paso, which was a
very eye-opening type of assignment. And it
really made me very familiar with the city and some
of its problems. And with the completion of the
plan.